We actually have to differentiate between pseudo classes and pseudo elements.
So what does this pseudo thing mean?
Pseudo classes define a style or allow us to define a style for a special state of an element, like the
hover or active state. Pseudo elements allow us to define a style of a specific part of an element. Pseudo
classes are defined with a single colon and then the class name like hover or active and pseudo elements
are defined by adding two colons
and then the element name and it's about the state versus the part, that's the difference.
Now you can see a list of available pseudo classes on MDN, link to that can be found in the last
lecture of this module,
there you find a short introduction and then an index of standard pseudo classes.
Now there, you can always click on one if you want to learn more, what we got for example is of course
the
hover pseudo class we just used but there are also classes that allow you to select like the first
element of the given type, so if you have a p, a paragraph selector you can add the first of type pseudo
class to only select the first paragraph in a given list of paragraphs, we're talking about siblings
here and so on.
So really feel free to dive into them, to be very honest,
there's only a couple of them which you use and you will see them all throughout the course,
for example we also got focus which is helpful for styling selected input elements but it's nice to
dive into all of them and get a brief overview over what you can do with them.
Always keep in mind, they allow us to control different states or to be more precise about what we want
to select,
like with first child or first of type. A pseudo element as mentioned on the slide allows you to select
a specific part of an element.
Now here's also a short index and there are less such elements and a good example actually is the first
letter,
it allows you to simply style the first letter of an element, like for a paragraph, differently than the
rest which of course is great for building block pages for example,
you can get this newspaper style where the first letter or first line differs from the other ones.
So let's quickly dive into some of them including the after pseudo element which is also a pretty interesting
one.
So let's quickly explore these pseudo elements and let's say here in the paragraph we already got at
the bottom, we want to change it with the pseudo element first letters.
So we want to change that m, that first letter.
Now that is the only paragraph we got and we'll remove that code anyways
but for now, we can simply select it with paragraph and then pseudo element
::first-letter
and now we could set the color to red and the font size to 20 pixels.
If we do that and we reload our page, you can see the m is bigger and it's red. So this is the first letter,
now let me remove this, it was just an example.
Very interesting
are the after and before pseudo elements, they actually allow you to render content through CSS and
this should only be helpful content which adds to the design, not crucial page content, such content
should always go into HTML especially for accessibility reasons
but what we can do with that for example is we can mark links in an even clearer way if we wanted
to do that.
So in our example, we're selecting a link here with main-nav__item A,
now we could add another selector, main-nav__item A and then add after
and this now allows us to set a special property which we can only set on after and before, the content property.
Content takes a string
and this is now some content which will be added to the DOM.
Here we could for example render a link text, maybe with a whitespace in front of it so it doesn't get
directly attached to the old text
and now we can also style that content,
for example we could set the color to red. If we do that and we go back to our page and reload,
you now see all our links here
in the nav items array have that red link after them
which is part of the content which we can also click.
So this is how we can use after and before, can be nice to render a little helper icon after a text, like
this, this will be opened in a new tab icon you see on some pages, stuff like that. I will also remove this
for now
but it's useful to know that with pseudo elements, you can control parts of an element whereas the
pseudo classes like hover allow you to control what you select or the state of an element.
That was a little dive into pseudo classes and elements,
now I remove the code because for now, we'll focus on hover and active which adds some real benefit to
our page, namely that we can hover or click on our links and see a different style.